Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number four 61. In this
episode, Scott talks with Ruby
language creator Matsumoto you can
hear Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I
am here in Japan today
at the go Azure event.
And I have the pleasure
of talking right now, live
in front of an audience
here with Matsumoto UK hero,
also known as mats. How
are you? Yeah. Good to
see you. Thank you so
much for chatting with us.
We have a applause. Now
this is great. I don't
usually have applause now. So
you are the creator of
the Ruby language and you
did this in 1996. I
started developing Ruby in 93,
and then, then I put
it in the opposite of
on, on 95. It's kind
of as old as Java.
Yeah, that is quite old.
Yeah. What is, what is
happening in your mind when
you're thinking, you know, I
need to make a language,
I need to make a
better language. What were you
doing in 93 that made
you make a new language?
Actually, the, I had been
a big fan of programming
language for a long time
since I was in high
school. So I studied a
lot about programming languages. Actually,
I, I was interested in
languages rather than making software.
So whatever the purpose is,
I want it, I want,
I want, I wanted the
land, the, to of a
programming language. So after I
graduated from school and university,
dang, I became a professional
programmer. And then in 93
in Japan, the bubble economy
was crashed. So the economy
was decreased and then my
project was canceled and luckily
I wasn't fired. So I
have no Saint job. I
have time. I have boring.
I had, I was boring
and I had an computer
on my desktop. So I
wanted start something. Then I,
my high school dream came,
came back, so, okay. Let's
create a language for my
own. So when I talk
to people who have made
languages before, I'm a software
person who makes applications. So
I always assume they're making
the app, the language for
an application, but when I
talk to language people, they're
making the language for the
language sake, for the joy.
Yes, yes. For the happiness
of making the lamb, that
kind of person. So you
weren't thinking this will be
a popular web language or
a scripting language. You were
just thinking this would be
a great language. Yeah. You
know, I learned a lot,
a lot about the programming
language. So I loved that
some feature of that language
or the other other feature
from the other language. So,
so I picked up these
lovely things, put it into
one in a unified design.
So that's what I wanted
to, so, so I, I
didn't mean to create, say
web programming language that the,
just the, a programming language,
we four of my favorite
features. Hmm. So what languages
were your favorite languages that
you pulled inspiration from? And
back then, I liked lisp,
small cock and C and
a little bit of Pearl
Pearl. Really? Yeah. Yeah. It
seems like you just described
some very elegant languages and
then Pearl. Yeah. Yeah. Paul
is of Pretty much elegance
and pragmatic. That's true. That's
true. So that's an interesting
point because there's a lot
of discussion around languages around.
Is this the purest language?
Is this a language for
the Lambda calculus or is
this the pragmatic? Let's get
some work done language. Yeah.
Yeah. I want to something
in between in very good
balance. Yeah. And balance is
something that people say they
feel when they are using
Ruby. One of the things
that I have heard is
that people like to write
Ruby like a haiku, have
you heard this? They want
the Ruby to flow and
to feel right. It's a
sense of aesthetic of art.
I don't hear this with
other languages. You don't think
about beautiful Java, but you
do hear beautiful Ruby. Was
that your intent? Yes, I,
I was, I had to
been pretty much focused on
the designing for human sake
for designers or for, I
mean that Ruby users, developers.
So, so I want as
a, you know, as a
primary user of the, my,
my own programming language. So
I wanted to amuse myself
by designing the, this programming
language suitable for me mysel
or so, but the unexpectedly
many people all over the
world find a failed similar
way. So I like this
programming language. This is, this,
this programming language. Declarative must
be pretty beautiful in Mo
in his own sight. So
I, I was surprised, you
know, I designed like clogging
language for myself. And then
so many people feel a
similar way. Hmm. That's interesting
because I hear that about
artists of other kinds, you
know, are you painting for
the public or are you
painting for yourself? If I
write, if I make some
art and I love the
art, I don't care what
you think, but if everyone
loves it, then you've touched
something more, kind of more
human, more deeper. It's interesting.
Also though, that you did
this quietly for a few
years alone. Yes. You didn't
have any one helping committee.
So I, I told some,
All my close friends, but
not, not, not a prophet
programmers. Right. So Ruby is
not something that has been
designed by committee. No, at
all. Right. So it's a
reflection of your style. And
then it immediately, immediately become
popular when you put it
out, you push a button
and go to sleep and
then you wake up famous.
Yeah. Took, took long, long
time to be become popular.
So I, so I previously
mentioned, I started developing Ruby
in 93 and then I
brought it in, in, on
the internet on 95, but
I don't know, five to
six years. So very few
people knew about the programming
language. And then on the
year 2000, the programmatic, Dave
Thomas wrote a book named,
we named our programming Ruby,
and which is kind of
a reference and a tutorial
combined into one book. Then
that book introduced the Ruby
language to the non Japanese
people. So many people first
met Ruby through that book
really? Yeah. On yeah, 2000
then a year, 2001, we
formed a, we organized the
first Ruby conference in Tampa,
Florida. Then every year we
had a Ruby conference. The
first Ruby conference was 10.
The Dumbo of attendee was
a, say 37 or something.
Very small conference, like a
user group. I use a
group of Meetup meetup. Yeah.
Yeah. And it was, it
was held a week before
the ACM oops law. So
the people, some of the
oops attendee also attended were
be conference. So we had
a attendee from the United States,
of course, in Japan, Mexico,
Germany, France from many countries.
But the number of only
30 study something. And had
you been a member of
like ACM and a kind
of a computer scientist as
you? Yeah. I, I, I
was a member of the
ICM, but you know, I'm
not a not Academy person,
but I just be, I
just became a member to
read some papers from the
ACM library. How many languages
do you think get created
and have small 30 person
meetups? And that's just the
end of that language. Yeah.
That's pretty much possible. And
I, I expect that kind
of, you know, you know,
ma maybe a hundred, a
hundred, 200 people use the
Ruby for several years and
then get, get bored and
the moving to the other
language, like a Python and
anything like that. And then
the language will be glossary
disappears from the internet. That
was what I expected at
the beginning, but that didn't
have. Yeah. And do you
get tired of Ruby though?
Hours later? It still makes
you happy. Yeah, it, it,
it, it, it, it was
designed to make me happy
and it worked Well. So
today this is still your
favorite language. Your language is
your favorite list. Do you
think about the next versions
and what's happening in other
languages right now? Cause there's
a lot of other go
is coming up and people
are talking about other languages.
There's a lot of excitement
around Scala Lisbeth, maybe seeing
a bit of a resurgence.
Yeah. In recent years, the
statically plugging language like a
scholar or say go or
out some other language and
a functional programming language
is getting more popular. And
then I, I understand the
pros from those, those languages,
but still. So I still
love the dynamicity and flexibility
and productivity or dynamic types
of programming language like Ruby.
So the, we a country
working on the, something in
between like a techno through
the technology, like a soft
piping who are gradual typing
so that you can write
a code without any type
of declaration. But the compiler
is smart enough to guess
that your intention of pipes,
then the compiler can tell
you, you, you are intention
and you can, you know,
you can have a conversation
about types with the competitor.
That's a really good way
to put that. I really
liked that. Some people like
in my world is very
much C-sharp the, the compiler
is a policeman and the
compiler is a spellchecker. Yeah.
Yeah. And the compiler says,
you're wrong. Stop doing that.
But you just described a
wonderful conversation with the compiler.
Well, I think you mean
this. What do you think?
Well, compiler, maybe this way
by giving different annotations, you
can bend the compiler to
your will. Yeah. Yeah. One
of my plan is that
kind of, you know, Google
has the feature name, the
digital means and something. So
you, if you type, if
you made a typo or
that if you choose the
wrong words, so the Google
suggests as the right keywords
to search. So in, I
I'd like to implement something,
something similar in a Ruby
error messages. So if I
made a pipe, a typo
or some, some kind of
mistakes, the competitor suggest me
that you did, you mean
this that's so helpful. Yeah.
To, to, to help us
fix the problem. That's a
very humanist approach programming. So
I want, I want the
computer to our sovereign. So
we w I want to
a, I want to be
a master of my pro
I'm in computers. So I
don't want to do, you
know, you know, get arrested
by making mistake. The computer
works for me. Yeah, absolutely.
I want my computer to
be like Jarvis and Tony
stark. Yeah. Like he's so
kind and so helpful to
me. Yeah. That's fantastic. I
really like that idea of
a conversation with your, with
your compiler. I liked that
you said that. So then
when did rails happen and
did, did he just do
rails? And then you said,
Hey, what's going on over
there? Or did he DHH
approached you? How did that
happen? You know, wherever this
was started 10 years ago,
2004. And then it was,
it became popular as soon
after that. And then so
many people found Ruby through
rails. So rails is so
popular and building up the
websites using rails that means
programming in Ruby so that
people learn, found and learned
Ruby through rails. And then
this, that became a basis
of the Ruby's popular reality
right now, Hey, this is
Scott. You know, I like
a good community edition. The
best things in life are
free. And the community license
from our sponsors sync fusion
will give individual and small
business developers access to more
than 650 components across 12
platforms. And that includes WPF
windows forms, JavaScript, Xamarin, Lightswitch.
You can check it all
out at sync, fusion.com/hanselman to
claim your free license. Did
that new use case change
your perspective or were you
already thinking web when you
started? We are thinking, thinking
where before that, so rails
is not the first web
application framework for Ruby. So
we had several of them
ESP before, but rails is
most productive and really became
most popular. And how do
their needs and use cases
influence you? Probably the rails
put, put the productivity and
the flexibility in the first
priority of Debra first that
is very different from others
back then. So the, you
know, we had the say
web application framework for Java,
but the, we have had
to write ponds of XML
Cole to, to implement the
flexibility. So that back then
the XML is the scripting
language. Yes, yes. I remember.
It's not easy to read.
It's not easy. Right. And
it seems also that a
number of people have used
Ruby to make their own
domain specific languages. It was
so flexible that they made
their own. Yeah. Yeah. Do
you, do you interact with
those? Are there any particular
domain specific languages in Ruby?
You know, I think rails
itself is a web domain
specific language to do web
dev DSL and a Sinatra
extended a step further. So
the, I, I encourage people
to use Ruby as a
basis of DSL, just know,
by using a DSL approach,
you, the programmers, or even
non-programmers can be more productive
and more flexible and application
will be programmer programmable. So
this is good thing Is
a very good thing. It
makes people happy when someone
is creating a language specification,
sometimes they will discover gaps
in that specification where someone
will use the language in
a way that the compiler
didn't expect. Well, Ruby was
coming up and gaining a
lot of use. Did anyone
find interesting use is where
they wrote something in Ruby
that you didn't think about
that it confused the compiler
in an interesting way and
change the language? I know
that's a hard question. Yeah.
That's a good question though.
And the rails comes up
with the label already named
active support, which is enhanced
language. So by the, that,
that rivalry adds pans of
master to the existing classes.
And then, so you can
say, for example, two days
ago to get the time
of the 48 hours prior
or something like that. And
that is, that is quite
interesting approach. Many people don't
expect to extend the existing
class, but I allow that,
but for on purpose, but
the rails people extend that
step a few steps farther
than I expected. Yeah. And
I think I know when
I saw active support for
the first time and typed
two dot days ago, I
just, it felt strange because
it was so fluent from
an English speakers perspective that
it almost seemed like magic.
Yeah. And I wonder if
you had thought about that
fluency, that idea of the
fluent interface before, and I
feel like maybe active support
and Ruby's flexibility inspired a
new generation to create these
fluent interfaces. We have the
test tribal in our spec,
which is quite the similar
to English sentence and, you
know, as a non English
speaker. So it's, it makes
me feel some somewhat weird
or two mats. But I,
at the same time, I,
I, I feel honor to
be a author of that
kind of forgiving language. Abusable
Changing topics a little bit.
One of the things that,
that I admire about you
is this, this funny concept
of men Swan, this one,
I mean, Swan mats is
nice. So we are nice.
Did you consciously try to
foster a positive community of
helpers or are you just
nice? And it just happened.
The, the, the term is
one self is not coming
from me. Of course not
from a, of course now
it's from, is for Marty
follower. He said, he said
means that means one for
the first time. And, but
I I'm sick of the
a hundred trolls in the
community. So, but in the
very early stage of the,
the Ruby community, we, we
are on the mailing lists
so that sometimes the very
ignorant people or arrogant people
come come, came and complains.
And the trolling and the
some, you know, it's quite
difficult for me in only
English speaker to handle the
situation. But then some, some
other guys became, became too
to what what'd I say,
knowledge pit paste, fight here
to, okay, this is not
the place to complain. This
is the place to, for
us to discuss or the
make the constructive discussion. Right.
So the, he helped us
to be, eh, to be
nice each other. Right. They
set the tone yeah. Room.
Yeah. The atmosphere, the atmosphere.
So I, I really to
be able to elect them.
And so, as a, as
a member of a community,
I try to be nice
to my many people. The,
the, the, the original atmosphere
was actually driven by the,
these guys in the alley
community. I, I followed him
there actually. So really it's
the early community members decided
let's change the tone. That's
not be trolls. Let's not
be arrogant. Let's be supportive.
Yeah. Yeah. So the, you
know, I like the term
means Swan. So the, actually
the, the, the Ali member
of the community, the whole
member of the community, the
design, the atmosphere, Tom of
the community. Yeah. That's great.
And that's something that everyone
should feel proud of, because
I think that if, if
people say one thing about
Ruby, they would say that
the community is welcoming. And
we hear this a lot
when newbies are starting out,
they find Ruby and the
community to be very, very
kind and very helpful. Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely. So you're working
on a, you work on
Ruby on a regular basis,
or do you, do you
think it will ever be
done? Would you ever put
it aside and say, I
think I'm done for a
year and I'm going to
do other things and then
come back or do you
think you'll always be improving
As I, I no longer
work as a programmer for
the C Rudy. So I
have the full time core
committers hired by Heroku, and
then two other guys are
working pretty much pretty well.
So as a, so as
a programmer, I don't have
to work on see Ruby
no longer, but as a
designer, I still working on
full time. So the, I,
the many design choices are
waiting for my, my decision.
So I make decisions to
do the fall, decide the
direction to the language follows.
And then at the S
as a, an a at
the same time, you know,
I'm a kind of time
sliced. So I sometimes work
on the alternative Ruby implementation
named Emma Ruby. So I'm
working on that. And then
I recently, I'm working on
the, some other programming language
named the stream. Is this
a hobby, or is this
for the next day? It's
not the next day Next
week? No, not just, just
a hobby and a prototype.
And when you're designing these
things, do you, is it
primarily just you thinking about
a feature that would make
you happy, or do you
feel now the pressure of
all the other users of
Ruby, because it was you
in a room alone, making
yourself happy with your, your,
your, your toy. But now
you have this community, this
rich community around you, Since
we have the, I don't
know, actually the literary millions
of users all over the
world. So the, the it's,
we have to be very,
very careful about that, not
to break anything. So the
compatibility is our first priority.
It is as a language.
So we have recently we
have many proposals and issues
of the ideas to change
the language better. So we
examine the, those ideas. So
we, if we keep the
compatibility, if we make, if,
make this change, make the
language better or not, or
if this change is alongside
the follow, the philosophy behind
the Ruby language or something.
So after these investigation and
the very serious consideration, we
pick sub something, pick some
of them, and then we
reject any many of them.
Has there been any thought
or do you, what do
you think about Ruby as
a possible replacement for JavaScript?
Because we hear people who
both love, JavaScript and hate
it, and they feel like,
you know, it's the worst
language ever, but it's the
only one we have because
there's such browser support. Why
didn't Ruby become the scripting
language for the browser? You
know, the decision is up
to the browser creators, like
a soul, the Mozilla company,
or the Google and the
Microsoft, all these big players
have to bake a doc
kind of big decision. And
at the, at the currency,
under the current situation, it's
nearly impossible. Yeah. It's never
going to happen. This is
the language we have. Yeah.
It's quite difficult to make
these three or four big
players to make that kind
of the big change or
that big compromise. What other
languages are you excited about
right now? Do you see
a new language and you
play with it and try
it out and see how
it feels? Oh, recently I
studied about a goal from
Google and a Swift from
Apple, and it is too
long, was a pretty interesting
thing in the different aspect
from this parent from different
aspect. And at the same
time, I'm interested in language
like C a closure and
a scholar language influence from
the functional programming language. I
read an article yesterday that
said that Swift is one
of the fastest growing languages.
I think the interesting thing
is that it's not, is
it the language and its
design and its style that
is driving that? Or is
it the promise of the
app store and making big
money? Yeah. So it's interesting
to see what drives the
growth of a language. Like
first it was Ruby and
that it made people happy
and then it was rails
and it made people productive.
And then now we have
app stores where it can
make people money, but it
still seems like you really
enjoy the, just the making
of the language and using
the language. Yeah. You know,
the ply, my motivation, different
from people to people, they
were positive developers, but at
the same time, I believe
the motivation needs to be
driven by, you know, joy
or internal satisfaction. So the
premium joy is one of
the very basic ingredient of
the motivation program program as
motivation. Yeah. I totally agree.
I think that, and I've
said this to my folks
at Microsoft that, you know,
does this, we use the
word delight sometimes too much,
but does this really make
them happy? Does this, whether
it be this button or
this keyword or this feature,
I want people to have
that joy of a child
just going, I made this,
I made this, I saw
someone on this code, newbies,
this is a chat code.
Nummies code newbies was talking
about that feeling that you
get when you get your
first rails app. Hello world.
Yeah. That's a great joy.
And actually I still same
way in my daily plumbing.
So I did it. Isn't
that funny? That makes me
happy. Something that makes me
very, very poppy. Yeah. I
work from home, so I
don't have an office, but
just a few weeks ago
I accomplished something. I didn't
think I could. And I
stood up in my chair
and I looked around and
there was nobody really there
to cheer me, but I,
and I tried to tell
my wife and she didn't
care. Yeah. That happens. But
yeah. That's okay. Well, thank
you so much for talking
with me. Thank you so
wonderful. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.